# Project-1
PHP2550 Project 1

## Overview(from Dr. Alice Paul's canvas site):
This project is a collaboration with Dr. Lauren Micalizzi from the Department Behavioral and Social Sciences. Exposure to smoking during pregnancy (SDP) and environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) are two of the most ubiquitous and hazardous of children’s environmental exposures. Seven to 15% of infants born per year are exposed to SDP and more than 25% of children are exposed to household ETS. SDP alone imposes a $4 billion annual economic burden due to health-care costs. Early smoke-exposure increases rates of externalizing behaviors in children, including Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, and rates of substance use problems, all of which have clear public health implications. Early smoke exposure is also linked to self-regulation problems (i.e., the maintenance of physiological, emotional, behavioral, and cognitive control).

## Objective
Although many studies suggests that early tracheostomy placement for babies with severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia (sBPD) has benefits, the work around the criteria and timing of the precedure is still incomplete. In this research project, we will attempt to address this issue by developing a regression model to predict the composite outcome of tracheostomy/death to guide the indication criteria and timing of tracheostomy placement. In our model we will include birth variables, respiratory support variables, and infant data at 36 and 44 weeks corrected gestational age(CGA). We estimate an ideal time frame to refer a patient for tracheostomy by providing predictions across different postmenstrual ages. 

## Methods
We first perform multiple data imputation(m = 5) using the MICE package in R and split the data into training and testing sets with a 70-30 split. From our exploratory data analysis we know that the composite outcome of tracheostomy and death of the neonatal infants are not evenly distributed throughout the centers. This is due to the fact that the patient’s severity with sBPD is correlated with which center they are placed in. Another point to consider with the centers is that once we fit a model, it will be difficult to get accurate predictions from said models since we cannot extrapolate outside the centers given in the data. Because of this we were either left with the option of leaving out the center variable and fit a logistic generalized linear model or fit a generalized mixed effects model with the center variable as a random intercept. We chose the latter as we believe that the random intercept will capture the variability between centers for each patient based on their differing levels of severity. In our fixed effect model we consider the composite outcome of tracheostomy and death as the binary outcome variable and the patients birth variables, respiratory support variables, and infant data at 36 and 44 weeks corrected gestational age(CGA) as predictors.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, we found that a full mixed effect model is best for prediction for the outcome of death and trachoestomy. Additionally, implementing a full model with both the 36 week and 44 week data allowed us to compare the coefficeints between 36 and 44 week data. We found that the variables describing the fraction of inspired Oxygen, medication for Pulmonary Hypertension(PH) and Peak Inspiratory Pressure (cmH2O) has opposite effects on the log odds of death/tracheostomy. We also found that the influence andom effects of the centers on the log odds of the outcome accurately depict what we discussed in the EDA section.

Some of the setbacks of our work here is that we don’t take into account some of the outliers in the data, although we did remove outliers heavily affecting the data we predicted on. There are many missing values that are indiscriminate between 36 weeks and 44 weeks which can sway the bias of the models. The model is difficult to generalize outside of centers included in the data. Another set back is that we don't implement interaction terms into the model because we want interpretation in the clinical setting to be simple, easy and efficient. One could try and implement interaction terms to attempt to see if the model prediction improves.


